# EC2
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) is resizable compute capacity in the cloud (virtual machines in the cloud). You only pay for the capacity that you actually use.

## Pricing options
* On demand - you pay a fixed rate by the hour (or by the second) without commitment. Perfect for tests, or users that would rather a low price and flexibility, short term applications.
* Reserved - you pay a certain amount upfront for a capacity reservation (you have a contract of 1 or 3 years), this offers a significant discount on the hourly charge. Steady applications with predictable usage, nice discounts for longer terms. The more "static" the reservation the bigger the discount.
* Spot - you bid a price you want for instance capacity. Spot prices are changing all the time. The instance runs only when the price matches the bid. When the price goes up, the instance is terminated. Good for huge amounts of calculations (compute power/capacity) and flexible start/end times. 
* Dedicated hosts - physical EC2 server dedicated for your use. Good for things with software license.

## Instance types
* F1 (Field programable gate array) - Genomic reasearch, financial analytics, real time video processing, big data, etc.
* I3 (High speed storage) - NoSQL DBs, Data warehousing, etc. 
* G3 (Graphics intensive) - Video encoding/3D application streaming. 
* H1 (High disk throughput) - MapReduce-based workloads, distributed file systems such as HDFS. 
* T2 (Lowest cost, general purpose) - Web servers/small DBs.
* D2 (Dense storage) - Fileservers/Data warehousing/Hadoop.
* R4 (Memory optimized) - Memory intensive apps/DBs.
* M5 (General purpose) - Application servers.
* C5 (Compute optimized) - CPU intensive apps/DBs.
* P3 (Graphics/General Purpose GPU) - Machine learning, BitCoin mining, etc. 
* X1 (Memory optimized) - SAP HANA/Apache spark, etc.

Mnemonic trick to remember the instance types: **Fight Dr Mc Px!**

## Exam tips
* Remember the pricing options. On demand x reserved x spot x dedicated
* Popular question: If a spot instance is terminated because of a price change, you won't be charged for a partial hour of usage. But if you terminate the instance yourself, you'll be charged for the complete hour in which the instance ran
* Remember the instance types mnemonic: **Fight Dr Mc Px!**